---
title: "Exploring market power using deep reinforcement learning for intelligent bidding strategies"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/2020-01-01-Exploring-market-power-using-deep-reinforcement-learning-for-intelligent-bidding-strategies
date: 2020-01-01
venue: 'In the proceedings of The 4th IEEE International Workshop on Big Data for Financial News and Data at 2020 IEEE International Conference on Big Data (IEEE BigData 2020)'
citation: ' Alexander Kell,  Matthew Forshaw,  A McGough, &quot;Exploring market power using deep reinforcement learning for intelligent bidding strategies.&quot; In the proceedings of The 4th IEEE International Workshop on Big Data for Financial News and Data at 2020 IEEE International Conference on Big Data (IEEE BigData 2020), 2020.'
---

Decentralized electricity markets are often dominated by a small set of generator companies who control the majority of the capacity. In this paper, we explore the effect of the total controlled electricity capacity by any single or group of generator companies on the average electricity price. We demonstrate this through ElecSim, a simulation of a country- wide energy market. We develop an agent, representing a power generator which uses a deep deterministic policy reinforcement learning algorithm to bid in a uniform pricing electricity market strategically. A uniform pricing market is one where all players are paid the highest accepted price. ElecSim is parameterized to the United Kingdom for the year 2018. This work can help inform policy on how to best regulate a market to ensure that the price of electricity remains competitive. We find that capacity has an impact on the average electricity price in a single year. If any single generator company, or a collaborating group of generator companies, control more than ⇠11% of generation capacity, prices begin to increase by ⇠25%. The value of ⇠25% and ⇠11% may vary between market structures and countries. For instance, different load profiles may favour a particular type of generator or a different distribution of generation capacity. Once the capacity controlled by a generator company is higher than ⇠35% of the total capacity, prices increase exponentially. The use of a market cap of approximately double the average market price has the effect of significantly decreasing this effect and maintaining a competitive market.

Use [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar?q=Exploring+market+power+using+deep+reinforcement+learning+for+intelligent+bidding+strategies){:target="_blank"} for full citation